welcome to sam's business growth show
i'm sam dunning a digital marketing
sales and business growth evangelist
tune in and subscribe today as i'll be
interviewing business leaders
experts and entrepreneurs from around
the globe you'll be learning their story
how digital marketing has helped them
along the way and exclusive tips
insights to help you skyrocket your own
business
[Music]
hi everyone and welcome back to a fresh
episode of sam's business growth
show and i'm delighted today to be
joined by patrick
tinney patrick is the founder and
managing partner of centroid training
and marketing
he's one of the most published authors
on business negotiations in canada
and over his 30-year career patrick has
concluded multi-million dollar
dollar media sales and negotiation
solutions for many of canada's
largest advertisers patrick a very warm
welcome sir
how are you doing i'm great thanks for
having me on sam come on let's rock
today
let's have it i'm looking forward to it
man
cool man i love the energy love it so
there's plenty we want to learn from
yourself today patrick um
and i think we're gonna take the angle
of negotiation as you've written several
books as we were talking before we
started recording
so this is a topic i'm interested in
particularly as i'm reading quite a lot
about it right now
and it's not something we've already
covered on the show much so i think it's
going to be really useful
as i think we've all been in a scenario
and certainly i have recently where
there's we've sent out proposal we've
done a presentation or a pitch
and we've we've kind of we think
everything's going well and it gets to
the final point
and we start the the customer at hand or
the prospective client starts trying to
beat us down on price
so we think everything's gone well and
they're saying well everything looks
good sam but
uh if you can sharpen your pencil if you
can get the price a bit better then we
might be in a position to
to move forward so if we can talk about
that um but before we get into this
juicy negotiation strategy patrick
myself and the audience would love to
know a bit of background on yourself
um so if you give us perhaps a quick
snapshot of how you got into sales
why you decided to kind of write your
write all these these books that are
really successful and perhaps any
lessons that you learnt along the way
and just give us a bit of background on
your good self sir
well um i'll take you way back and then
i'll bring your way forward
um i was born into uh a family that was
very modest
um i'll tell you how modest there was no
indoor plumbing in canada
uh that's quite modest just visualize
that
and uh so um my uh
my father was involved in a um
uh in a construction project in a small
town and
um for whatever reason he and his
partner didn't uh
divvy up the proceeds evenly i'm going
to be very kind
so we had to move to um hamilton ontario
which is like steel town it's like
pittsburgh it's like allentown in the
united states it's very industrial
and um and then my father paid everybody
back which
which you do when you live in a small
town because
your word is your word and um about a
month after you paid everybody back
i would have been about nine years old
he was working at uh as a welder
at international harvester
working on the very large cultivation
machines in the agricultural business
and he dropped that so i had to um
i'd go make money i mean we there was no
money
in our home and my mother who was 39 had
to go back
and get a grade 12 education so she
could become a stenographer and she
she just kind of pulled me aside she
said pat she said
there is no money here so uh somehow son
you're going to have to figure out how
to go out and make money
enough to take care of you i'll put a
roof over your head
but you got to help me with the rest and
um
and i'll just leave you alone to go do
that so
that meant that i would take on every
job in the world i mean
it wasn't a job i wouldn't do so as long
as it was legal
uh we'd have um we'd have people call
over the house and say well you know
what's pat doing today
well you know he's um he's he's around
um
would pat be interested in doing some
gardening he's gonna get really dirty
he's gonna make five dollars and he's
gonna he's gonna be able to drink all
the pop he wants to drink all day long
what does pat think about that and my
mother would turn he said
he just left he's running toward you
well man how old were you then pat oh
gosh i was really young nine years old
uh
yeah it's really hard and we lived in an
apartment we didn't you know
we had to leave the house that you know
that i was born into
and you know very quickly after that i
you know
school to me was uh was one of those
strange places it was like i
i know that i was supposed to be there
but it was just like i was going through
the paces
and when i got to high school it seemed
to be even worse like
high school seemed to be a place where i
know i needed to have to finish and my
grades were all okay
i didn't do great in the beginning but
my grades were very good all the way
through i wrote very few exams
but i was also working up to 40 hours a
week delivering pianos carpets
groceries anything i could do as a
matter of fact i lied about my age
to get into a piano delivery company and
um
and within about a year i was running
the whole um
uh the whole delivery team to deliver
you know some weeks uh a hundred pianos
and organs a week and i was using the
football team at my high school and
and the uh the guys from the basketball
team so i
you know i dream of big dudes you know
that you just say
man we're gonna make money today you
know and i'd be working
uh i'd um i'd get up in the morning slam
back as much food as i could
get to high school uh you know get back
home by about
four o'clock uh slam back some more food
and then i'd get home at 10 o'clock
and do my homework that was me wow man
the funny thing though i was on a co-op
um cooperative training thing
at high school and they said what do you
want to do and i said i don't know i
said everybody else is going off to look
at
steel and stuff and automotive and
everything else
i said i'd like to see what happens
inside a newspaper
so anyway i walked inside the hamilton
spectator daily newspaper
and i i walked into the advertising
department all these guys these women
are sitting around they're laughing on
the phone
they're talking to customers they're
smoking cigarettes they're
doing funny drawings and you know they
pack
all kinds of stuff into their bags
they're saying see at lunch man i'm
gonna go out and sell a bunch of stuff
today
we're gonna crush it you know and that
was like the whole environment it was
electric
so i went back to high school and i took
myself out of
you know all the sciences all the the
history everything
i said take me out of everything that i
don't need and
put me into every business course i
don't care who's in the class
i just need to know everything about
business and there was only one other
guy in there
so i you know that was a great thing
because i was
one of two males in a room full of
females how good can that get sounds all
right to me
see you got you got a flavor for sales
you got a buzz for it
and then you wanted to take all that it
was wonderful i had a great time
um you know but uh you know from there i
um
i went on to uh you know local college
um they wanted to
teach national advertising i didn't get
it right
uh so left there and then i ended up in
a really cool college
in oakville that taught retail
advertising
and i just love the whole idea of retail
because retail
is a bottoms-up view of the world in the
old days
you know there was this great cachet
about you know advertising agencies you
know we
see the world and all the rest of it i
got news for everybody
if you don't cash the cash register if
if that
you know if that deposit doesn't go
through if that credit card doesn't work
if you can't make your rent it doesn't
matter
what kind of products are produced you
have to have people to buy them you need
customers
and um and to me i just i just love that
um
and and part of it was um as a young lad
um i remember the first season my
dad passed away passed away in november
i'm sure my mother never wanted to put
up a christmas tree
but she did i don't know how she did it
i i to this day my heart i i just can't
believe she did that
but um she asked me what i wanted for
christmas i said mom buy me the biggest
shovel in the world
i'm going to go out and i am going to
shovel more walks than you've ever seen
in your life
and so i i pray for snow and i'd get up
i'd get up before school i'd go and
shovel after school
i would shovel all weekend long and i
i'd make like
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
cold calls
knocking on doors of people i didn't
know and you know what
can you imagine can you imagine
my no ratio my no ratio was over the
moon
i mean yeah you know if i got uh if i
got
seven jobs in a day and i made like you
know 20 or 30 bucks which is a lot of
money in those days
um i killed it you know so when people
say
oh i gotta make a cold call what do you
think this is a rattlesnake it's not a
rattlesnake
that that's a line to money i used to
walk my son up to the um
the front window of our house and i'd
pull the curtains back i'd say sean what
do you see up there
and he'd say i don't know dad what do i
see i said all i see is money it's
laying all over the floor
oh it's laying all over the streets it's
on the grass all we have to do is walk
up and
engage people we just talk to them and
say uh what is it you need to get done
today and how can i help you
oh by the way there's money involved
great
simple as that yeah love it
love it love the energy man i love the
um the
the willingness and not not being afraid
to put in the activity to make it happen
which um do you know what it is you're
either you're either embracing positive
risk
to make more money or you're not
period you know professionalism really
matters these days
you know just getting a job done because
you got paid to get a job done
that doesn't cut it you know if you want
to be in that top five percent
you've got to work hard you've got to
work harder than everybody else
i think i was mentioning you off air it
took me seven years to finish
unlocking yes this book here
and then i went back two years after it
was published and i rewrote it
and made it twice as good
that's what it means to complete your
mission
and when you're in the corporate world
or if you're an entrepreneur running a
business
and you have to pull your employees
inside and you say hey listen you know
we really had a bad quarter i'm sorry
you gotta work harder
therese truth all right patrick well
that's a definitely an interesting story
and i'm enjoying it so far so before we
talk more about your business we'll jump
back into your business towards the end
of the show
and we'll also talk about some of the
the marketing channels you've enjoyed
to gain a flow of new enquiries and new
customers
and some some of these channels are
everyone tuning in can enjoy and get
stuck into but the theme of today's
episode is all about negotiations so as
i said before something's not really
covered in a great deal
um so i'd love to there's there's two
main things we'd like we're going to
talk about how
how could we actually think we are at
negotiations versus how good we actually
are
and so if we perhaps talk about that
first and i know off there patrick you
said to
to me how good a negotiation do you
think i am and i answered with probably
between a six and seven um so yeah
perhaps you could shed some more more
light on that that patrick that we
perhaps underestimate do we
underestimate or do we overestimate our
um negotiation skills are we worse or
better than we think that we should be
i honestly think i have witnessed
um in my you know almost three decades
of working in the media business
i've witnessed people close some of the
worst deals i've ever seen as a matter
of fact i was a bit of a fixer
if the deal was was really that bad
there would be times when i'd be called
in to go back in and just say to the
customer i'm sorry
they gave you something they shouldn't
have given you my guys are going to be
really upset on delivery can we just sit
down and have an honest conversation
about what it is that you should be
receiving in terms
of a cost so that our side makes the
appropriate amount of profit and you get
terrific delivery and those are really
hard conversations um regarding
um you know how good we think we are
um i've done over 50 book signings in a
in a very large um uh book company in
canada called chapters and indigo
and so i've done them from our our
capital in ottawa right across to
uh the west side of toronto and one of
the things that really struck me
uh about negotiation was that i really
wanted to you know do some
you know live in the moment research
so i would hand out somewhere between
250 and 300 business cards every book
signing
i would talk to people and i would ask
and i'd say
mrs jones you
you look like a pretty sharp business
person
in the area of business negotiation how
do you how do you see yourself on a
scale of one to ten
uh ten being the best one being the
worst
and there'd be some pause maybe mr jones
would get involved
and anyway there'll be some rumbling
back and forth and i'd get a number
and the number was usually between six
and a half and seven and a half out of
ten
and so i would say to the person i was
engaging
i would say it sounds like you're
getting first of all fantastic and
congratulations i mean that's
a great number sounds like you're
winning somewhere around 65 to 70
of all the deals you're involved in and
the person pauses and they go
yeah that sounds about right i said
terrific
so how many negotiation strategies can
you name
when do you use them for buyer and
seller risk
and how do you identify them for time
compression
and time decompression effect from a
tactical perspective
and the answer is one
or none there was a call i ran into a
couple of savants that were twos
but i mean they would shock me i can
identify
somewhere between 25 and 30 of them and
i put 25 of them in the back of
unlocking s
the revised edition so what i do is i
i name the negotiation strategy i
deconstruct it for you in very simple
language
i tell you what the buyer risk is i tell
you what the seller risk is i tell you
how much time you have to complete that
deal
or you can take as much time as you want
and i also talk about risk
risk is really important in negotiation
because so for instance um
you know we talked a little bit off
there about you know you know what about
if somebody come in and they undercut
you in a deal
so first of all you've got you know your
cost modeling so you understand where
your profitability is
um you know that selling one of anything
to a customer
is difficult because you have to take
them through your entire system so you
want to sell them multiples of things
the other thing is is that you want to
be able to do a swot analysis
on the competitor that your customer is
holding up as
the you know as the it that you have to
beat
but while they're doing that what
they're also doing is they're using
your competitors proposal
as um as a stick if you will
yeah the old competitive bargaining chip
i think we're all very
very familiar with that one well the
strategy is called share and compare
so you you come in as a loyal
um you come in as a
as a loyal seller and you've you've
you've given them your proposal and they
say sam looks great
fantastic gotta talk to a couple of
other people
can i get back to you in a couple of
days sam says sure
how does it look to you well i told you
it looks great
and then they come back a couple of days
later and they say sam
man you are so close you were so
close you know i
we just don't have the money we can't
afford you
and that strategy is called puremouth
everybody uses it it's not a tactic by
the way
you see large corporations use that
i've gone into gigantic corporations and
i'll walk into the hr department and say
oh pat we want you to come in and do a
like a day or a half a day and
you know we've got like 30 people we
want to put in row maybe 40 50 could be
as many as 100
oh but we have no money i don't know
what we're gonna do i said but wait a
minute
you're a billion dollar corporation you
don't have any money oh
they have money but i don't have money
it's a joke it's a game you know and
it's you know and if you call them out
on and you just sort of say hey come on
you know go go next door and talk to the
party who's involved
uh who ultimately is going to receive
the the training and just say
you know here's the quality that we're
going to get so you know
patrick tinney has written four books
he's worked with
companies like kpmg he's worked with
credit unions he's worked with insurance
companies he's worked with
you know construction folks um you name
it
um newspapers largest newspaper in
canada
i've trained those folks you know so the
guys feel tested
we we know what he does and he's got
some very
um unique ideas around how to do
simulations and training sessions so
uh that the material is sticky
and i'm not presenting this way as kind
of an infomercial but what i'm trying to
say to you
is that is that negotiation
understood by professionals by
professional buyers
is going to eat into your pocketbook and
i'll tell you one last thing
it's really really important if you want
to know what your chief competitors
are presenting to your dream client
do a swot analysis on their strengths
and opportunities
and you'll see everything that's going
to be in their proposal
interesting so what you what your point
eurasia's now patrick
is also familiar and i can certainly
relate and i'm sure a lot of people
tuning in can
where um we send our proposal we send
our presentation we send our quote
whatever it is i'm i'm
referring to b2b selling right now um
submitted our proposed whatever it may
be that we give to our clients to try
and win business
and they've said looks fantastic looks
awesome sam love it
i'll come back to you let's say i've
submitted it on friday i'll come back to
you next week
monday or tuesday and we'll get the deal
done yeah like you say crickets
try contact them by phone by email or
anything sometimes they don't respond or
maybe they respond a week
two weeks later sorry we went with a
competitor or sorry we went another way
or sorry we did it in house or any
excuse under the sun
and we're none the wiser because we
don't really know what's happened
internally with their organization
um as far as we know the deal's as good
as done
but a week or two later we've heard and
it's bad news because we thought that
deal was as good as done
how can we avoid that happening patrick
well uh it actually happens much earlier
in the
um in the engagement with the client and
as sellers most of us
are people who communicate ex
exceptionally well
we write great proposals you know we
we want to know about the customer but
we
we really don't enjoy asking the really
hard questions
around are you actually going to buy
are you interested in quality
do you want results where do you see
here now
where do you see yourself now where do
you see yourself into the future
and how can i get you there with my
product i want to be the gap between now
and the business that you can't touch
yet with the um
you know with with the current
instruments and or employees that you
have on staff
so if if those things interest you
then we have a discussion if you want
cheap and cheerful i'll give you a list
of names
because you might not be a client for me
got it so ask asking the right detailed
and tough questions
questions hard questions and i'll tell
you what it see it's even harder right
now with covid
it really is it's harder because you you
don't want to sort of bounce yourself
out of the game
too early but i'll tell you the the the
thing that's also really important right
now is the time is your greatest um
you know that that that's that's your
money
time is money i know that sounds kind of
goofy but you know
i've i i don't know how many people that
i've heard who say oh yeah you know
i got this deal in my pipeline and it's
coming and all the rest hey by the way
it's happened to me
i mean i've been involved with some
people who i've actually known
personally over
over a lifetime and they do goofy things
at the end and you know
i still come on you can't do that stuff
we're all better than that you know in
one case i
i i was being guided in by an hr
professional into a company
and when i got in there and they told me
what their secret sauce was i went oh my
god get me
out of this building so i largely agreed
with everything they said and then i
went home
and i wrote a proposal i knew they
couldn't accept so i could get away from
them
happens athens man interesting
open the box slowly close the box slowly
never slam the box closed and never say
never
agreed okay so earlier on patrick you
mentioned there was different types of
negotiation strategy
um so did you say there was 20 or so
that you mentioned in your book was that
yeah it's not right i was
off yeah i've cataloged around 25 that i
put in the book
okay and you know i'll you know the
easiest way to illustrate is the worst
one of all
is split the difference if you ever see
somebody saying
hey sam you know um
you know if you can just come up another
you know i don't know cut another couple
hundred bucks on this deal
i'll split the difference with you well
they just asked you to give them money
for free
whoever controls the split you have to
ask yourself
why are they controlling the split and
why are they so willing to give it away
it's laziness the real estate guys i
mean that's their
you know if you look at oh i'm gonna
throw a number out there if you look at
you know 60 70 80 percent of the real
estate deals that get done
i bet you split the differences in there
somewhere it's awful
yeah man i mean that's that's probably
one of the the most common things that
happens again
taking it back to b2b selling when we've
done our presentation we've done our
pitch we're getting towards the part
where we want to ask for the business
so we're asking our prospective client
if it makes sense to move forward
to move ahead with a deal um and then
they they come back they say everything
looks great
but if you just sharpen your pencil if
you can maybe drop a few grand or a few
hundred off the price and i think we can
move forward
so have you got any tips that we can
utilize patrick to
to make sure we're not cutting ourselves
sort we're not ruining our commission
check and we're not kind of
cutting our cutting our nose to spot on
that kind of thing
exactly so first of all you have to
understand how profitable you are
um you know you really really have to be
have a clear understanding of how it is
you make money or how it is you don't
make money
um then you have to identify
whether this customer is going to be a
one-time customer or whether they're
going to be a dream customer
if they're going to be a dream customer
you may have to work your way into the
tent
um but if they're just going to use you
be careful what you give them um there's
a
there's a really cool negotiation
strategy called the growing list
and uh i've run into a few times and i
always giggle as
as it happens it can happen at the front
or it can happen at the back so there's
one guy that i went in to do some
business with and he said to me he would
get talking about the deal and you know
and
and how much he was going to invest and
they'd say what do you think about that
and i'd say well you know if it was me i
would do x y and z and he'd say
that's a great piece of information
don't bill me for that
that's called the growing list it can
happen on the back end
sam on the back end you're just sitting
there signing a deal
all right now i don't know what a big
deal is for you but let me just sort of
throw it a number and say 50 grand is
interesting to you and
um and the customer looks up at you
again and they say oh come on sam like
you know i'm gonna sign this thing off
but just as i'm doing it could you throw
in a couple of abc's i know they don't
mean anything to you
you know they probably only represent
you know i don't know five percent of
this deal
i mean five percent is nothing to you
what do you say just as i'm closing this
up
where are you at so it depends
yeah well there you go but what you got
to do is you got to call them out on it
you got to call them out
and you say all right i'm in
but i'm in uh from
the same spirit of the agreement you are
how can we make this
deal just a tiny bit bigger a bigger
piece of the pie agreement
so that me giving you that five percent
makes sense because
i'm actually going to pick up a little
bit more business
which will justify the size uh
breadth and depth of this deal now how
does that make sense to you
and they say well i'm not going to give
you any more you just better cough up
then
what i would do in that situation is i
would do a detailed
report on exactly what that extra five
percent meant
and what it will mean to that customer
in the future
and by the way it doesn't happen again
okay so kind of breaking down exactly
what they're asking for
in that situation is that we mean yeah
as i say you may have to climb into the
tent
so you know there may be a little bit of
give and take on the way in
but you have to be profitable if if if
the whole discussion is
sam you're a great guy but i'm important
and it doesn't matter whether you make
any money
let me put that one together slowly
you're basically indentured
i don't like that we're better than that
you see if you did that in a large
corporation
um the guys up in the credit department
the guys in the risk department if you
happen to work at a bank the guys
the guys in the risk department spend
all day doing this um
i know because i i trained a bunch of
bankers
on on on how to handle objections
and uh and how to squeeze a little bit
more margin
out in a uh in a low
interest environment and uh you know
it's really interesting
you think that um uh there isn't a
there isn't a business category that
doesn't have to deal with this and i
i think you you might be surprised the
only guys that really don't have to
negotiate a lot
are the ones that have what i would call
a seller's vertical
and by that i mean they own the market
so deeply
that there is such demand and scarcity
around their product think apple when
the apple
you know iphones first came up people
were lining up for blocks they were
camping out overnight
well they're not going to negotiate with
you on the other hand if you sell
gravel sam can you throw a couple extra
couple of shovels of gravel on the back
there
you turn on you say i think the boss is
gonna be at lunch at around 11 o'clock
when he usually goes he won't be back
till two so you can count
those two extra shovels
nice example and i think why negotiation
is so valuable because like you were
saying patrick it's not just important
for
us as business owners or sales
professionals to to be able to
to sell to our prospects to our clients
it's also good in turn even if you're
not a sales professional you might be a
marketer or you might be in
another profession to communicate
internally
so if you're looking to negotiate a
better job position
if you're looking to negotiate with um
your manager who's getting you to try
and do a task that you don't really want
to be doing because it's maybe not
crucial to your work so there's so many
different
elements of our working lives and our
personal lives where it can be useful
so it's such a such a useful skill to
to pick up on in the new book the bonus
round
what i try to get across to people is
that you're negotiating
up across
and around so when you work in a
business
you negotiate up with your boss those
are some of the brightest people in the
business by the way because they're
managing
a guy who's trying to manage them you're
negotiating across because you're going
to talk to
a variety of different departments
you're going to say all right listen i'm
going to go into the credit department
and say
this deal looks a little skinny but are
you with me because if you're not with
me i want to know now
then you go into production you say all
right we're going to have to work hard
on this because they're not
living up to our specifications entirely
but i think if we just kind of
modulate our equipment a little bit
we'll be able to get this done are you
with me
and you go into the creative department
you say guys we got to make a
modification here
i don't want you to put too much into it
but it's got to look very professional
are you with me
so so what you're doing is you're
negotiating
a a crop and then finally you have the
people that
implement everything into your systems
you don't look down on those people
you speak to them with great respect and
say you know what i'm glad you came to
work today
we've got a great client we're all going
to have to work
uh arms linked can i count on you
like it yeah that makes sense and so
we've talked about patrick
why not splitting the difference we've
talked about how to deal with
um when your prospective clients ask you
to add that a little bit extra or take
the price down that little bit
but what are some of the other
negotiation strategies that are perhaps
quite common
um when trying to get deals done and
ways that we can overcome those
so i'm gonna i'm gonna share a funny one
with you and this is actually
the title of the book the bonus round so
my friend steve kosic
um i i handled the largest retail
category
at the um southern uh
group of newspapers in canada they were
the biggest newspapers in canada
ex the toronto star which i also worked
for at one point
and so
he he had this really cool way of
finishing
negotiations that i picked up on it
really early
and it just made me laugh because part
of my deal was as a
as a corporate seller is that i would
bring people in from
the various newspapers that i
represented across canada there were
times when they would want to come in
and personally have a seat at the table
so they made sure these guys in toronto
were doing it wrong
right you know so all right so come on
in
and then you can just see them they they
they get anxious
they push their stuff onto the table too
quick they don't pace themselves
their body language is very
uncomfortable you know they're you know
they've got all
this kind of stuff going on and just in
the chair and you know the eyes are big
and and and and they're talking too
quickly
and so my friend steve kasich at the
hudson's bay company and by the way his
um budget back in the mid 90s was a
hundred
million dollars he'd buy a hundred
million dollars
in media now if you believe if you
if you believe that money doubles every
seven to ten years
now come forward you know
35 years how big is that budget so my
my piece that budget was 12 to 13
million dollars a year that's what i had
to fight for
i was one of the largest suppliers in
there
and so steve had this thing going when
my guys would come in it was hysterical
sam
so he'd be sitting there looking at a
deal and he kind of go oh
and then the hands will start to work
their way around the table
and start to lift paper oh my god
how am i going to explain this to my
people holy jeez
and the person on my side would say
steve
you're really looking trouble man you
you look
you you look like you're almost there
like i think we've got a deal
is there any way that i can help you
push this across the line
at which point steve would sit up and
he'd say
what do you got in mind
brilliant and that is called the bonus
round
and it's so funny because i watched him
do it so many times
and i would wait for the big pause it
would be the oh that would drop and he'd
say things like
i just can't play i don't know how
they're they just don't understand i
can't play like this
and and later we got together for
golf after we both left left our
respective companies i'd say steve
come on man you got to tell me about
this and he cracked the smile he started
to laugh so he said man
he said i used that over and over and
over again
and he said i was going to sign 95 of
the deals
but i just knew if i just stalled and
pushed a bunch of paper around my desk
and lifted stuff up and looked down and
go
and hold my hand for a little bit but
not really
i'm talking to myself to create this
confusion
which creates confusion on the other
side of the table and it's this
and in the end it would be like dropping
the head um and it creates this really
uncomfortable situation
visualize this you know you're going
into one of the biggest
um uh corporations in the uk
and you're dealing with their head buyer
and they and they start doing that with
you
and your you know is a great deal and
you just like you can feel it you can
taste it you can smell it
and somebody does that to you
yeah you wouldn't know how to react it's
going to put you on your
on your edge it's going to it's going to
be tough man it's hard people don't like
silence either do they and people don't
like these kind of awkward situations
that's
why it's played it so well they they
don't and that and and that's why
you know uh that's why i really seasoned
buyers now we're in a buyer's market you
gotta remember which is even worse
and i'll tell you why you see from from
the year 1950 to
around the year 2000 it was a seller's
market and we were trying to recover
from the second world war
it was the big baby boom and we were
building everything
we rebuilt your island we
rebuilt all of the uh uh you know all of
the
uh factories across canada that were
converted into making things like
corvette
boats we were building artillery we were
building tanks we were building trucks
everything
we had to go back to building
agricultural uh
equipment building cars and so that's
when you got this huge
gigantic explosion in in in the retail
business
the year 2000 changed it flipped over
globalization happened
and all of a sudden you've got
competitors from indonesia
you got competitors from china you got
competitors from australia
you got competitors from canada oh wait
i didn't mean that
but anyway you know what i mean
and now you have too many sellers and
not enough buyers so now the buyers are
even stronger
and they've got access to databases
they've got access to
pricing channels within your sales
vertical and they
they know you they've studied your your
company better than you have
if you don't study their company better
than they have you're
in deep poo poo
that's all i can tell you truth yeah
truman
and before we look to wrap things up
patrick is there any other
negotiation perhaps quick takeaways that
we can um
we've already gone through some some
real gems so far but anything we can do
to avoid
the last minute panic where we say when
we just give in to our prospective
customers so yeah let's get the deal
done let's meet you in the middle let's
let's cut a deal now because it's end of
the month and i want to get this deal
done for my commission check or to hit
my target or
whatever it may be are there any little
little nuggets of advice you can share
with us that can prevent the
the kind of harming our dead bottom line
yeah
and especially important deals sam so
you know your your company
you do important deals i do important
deals with my company the companies i
represented
you know the ones that are really
important so you have to invest
the time into those deals so you
understand the granularity of the deal
you understand the cost modeling you
understand where you can't go
you understand that there are some
pieces of business that you can't accept
under any circumstances uh unless the
price is elevated
um so you got you have to understand all
that stuff and
and you have to um you have to go talk
to your colleagues you may have even
talked to competitors you have to do
swot analysis
on competitors you have to do swot
analysis on the company that you're
selling to
you have to understand how relevant you
are
in that company and don't be afraid to
ask
and and if you don't get a deal i love
this one this is a sam cohen i think i
read it in his book you can negotiate
anything
you say iron
sorry sam i understand we're not going
to get a deal done today
right you go yeah we're not going to
dump
okay so we both know we're not going to
get a deal done but if we could have got
a deal done what would that deal
look like to you you want to know why
you want to know that
because the supplier that they just
hired may screw up tomorrow and they may
just call you back and you know exactly
what that number is
that's a great tip love it man nice
little takeaway
awesome appreciate you sharing this all
with us patrick it's been super useful
um so jumping back to your own business
as with the show we always like to take
the angle of digital marketing
and how that's helped your own business
so i know we were saying before you
utilize video and linkedin so what are
the some of the the channels in terms of
digital that have helped your business
helped you to acquire clients acquire
customers that you'd recommend
to our listeners to our viewers you know
uh i might be one of those guys that
just
doesn't get it so i'm just gonna say
that but i believe
in building strong friendships and
relationships before doing business
because if you don't uh then you become
a commodity
and you have to you have to understand
just how good your own products are
versus the rest of the market
and you have to understand where you
reside
in that buyer's
food chain so are you the number one the
number two the number three the number
four
because the further you get down that
pecking order the more you become a
commodity and the more price will come
into play
and let's be perfectly honest and say if
you're selling a really good product
you can explain that product very simply
in very simple language so if the
customer
buys your product and they have to sell
it internally again
they can use very small words that
de-risk the sale
that help you um
close those dream deals i actually had a
large customer call me up one day and
and i can't give you the name but it's
really big
and they said pat we'd uh we'd like you
to come in and talk to a bunch of our
engineers
and i said uh sure um
i said when's it coming up they told me
i said
who's the competitor and they said pat
our people have had a look at you you
either take the money you don't take the
money we'll run an interning but you're
the only candidate
that's when you know that you're hitting
the mark in the market
it's a good question in itself just
asking who's the competitor
better to do it because you don't
otherwise you won't understand where you
are in the pecking order
that's great man love it awesome well
everyone you've been tuning in to
sam's business growth show where we sit
down with business leaders experts and
entrepreneurs from around the globe
we find out their story how digital
marketing has happened along the way and
their exclusive insights
and recommendations to help you
skyrocket yourselves and your business
patrick really appreciate you coming on
man
um how can everyone learn from you
connect with you
and um what's the best way to get in
touch and find out more about your books
sure um so you can just google my name
patrick tinney on
amazon if you happen to live in canada
do the same on chapters.ca
i'm on linkedin patrick tinney
i'm on twitter at centroid deals
my website is centroid
c-e-n-t-r-o-i-d-marketing.com
go on my website have a look there's a
ton
of free stuff good stuff and you'll get
all my recommended reads
and just drop me a line pick up the
phone call me
um anybody who wants to have a chat in
my world first 20 minutes are free
i want to make friends awesome man
thanks very much and if you've enjoyed
the show please do subscribe on your
podcast channel of choice
we've got tons of interviews with
business leaders from all across the
globe
so tune in on youtube spotify apple
podcast wherever the heck you get your
podcast
from otherwise thank you so much for
coming on patrick appreciate it
thank you sir are you tired of
constantly hunting for new customers
you could be missing out on regular
inbound opportunities all because
your website isn't on the first page of
google
perhaps you're already spending lots of
money on advertising but your website is
failing to convert
all of your hard-earned visitors into a
consistent flow
of new customers if you'd like to learn
more about our unusual approach
that brings idle clients straight to you
connect with sam dunning on linkedin
or book a free 20-minute consultation
via webchoiceuk.com
that's webchoiceuk.com
subscribe today for more digital
marketing sales and business growth tips
from the experts